and we can now speak to James denlo he's
the head of conflict and humanitarian
policy at save the children UK he joins
us from London good to see you now the
UN says Gaza has become a graveyard for
children just how serious is their
plight well it doesn't get much more
serious than the numbers we've seen of
children killed uh of children injured
of children uh forced from their homes
of children in desperate need of food
and water of children who had their
daily routine completely turned on its
head in Gaza as their education
completely paus for instance but the the
most traumatic images are of the
children who have lost their lives it's
worth always reminding ourselves that
children have a different physiology to
adults and not just little adults they
have less blood to lose they have
thinner skin more brittle bones and of
course the kind of warfare that we're
seeing in Gaza today uh is extremely
deadly for them MH now what about your
colleagues in Gaza I mean it's in your
name you want to save the children but
are they even able to provide any help
at this
point well our staff in Gaza and our
thoughts are always with them and
unfortunately with the power cuts and
various Internet outages often we can't
be in touch with all of them all the
time as we'd like uh but they're having
to look after and save their own
children uh first and foremost and of
course the vast majority of our team uh
like the majority now of the population
of the Gaza Strip have been forced from
their homes by the events of the the
last three weeks so it is uh the most
dangerous place in the world to be an
aid worker today uh there have been
dozens of Aid workers uh killed in the
last few weeks uh and it makes it
impossible to to do the amount of
humanitarian programming that we need to
do if you consider that the population
was 80% dependent on humanitarian Aid
before the events that we've seen unfold
yeah now some humanitarian Aid has been
getting through the Rafa border crossing
are you at all hopeful that this will
increase in the days to
come well we have to have hope but we Al
also have to remember that uh there was
an average of around 500 trucks a day
going into Gaza before uh this conflict
broke out uh and that number is now some
just over 200 in the space of three
weeks so there's a huge backlog the
needs are far higher and uh the numbers
of trucks that we need to go in need to
rise exponentially but in addition to
that you need all the water turned back
on you need electricity turned back on
so the desalination plants can operate
you need fuel for the power plants uh
but most critically you need a some form
of humanitarian ceasefire so that um so
that children in Gaza can be reached a
Seas fire that the Israeli government
says at this point is off the table that
was James Denow from save the children
all the best to your colleagues thank
you so
much thank
you now wounded Palestinians and foreign
passport holders have been allowed to
leave Gaza for the first time today
officials say several hundred have
entered Egypt through the Rafa border
crossing we just heard about it they are
the first to benefit from an agreement
brokered by Qatar among those allowed
across are German citizens working for
international Aid
agencies people in Gaza have waited for
weeks for this gate to open towards
Egypt and now it
has within an hour these ambulances were
rushing through according to the UN
thousands of civilians have been injured
in Gaza since Israel began its war on
terror group
Hamas many of them critically wounded
are in urgent need of Medical Care
Egyptian authorities say 81 gazin were
allowed to go across based on a deal
struck between Egypt Israel and Hamas
and mediated by Qatar
on the other side Egypt has set up a
field hospital to treat injured
Palestinians and thousands of doctors
have registered to
help at the same time Volunteers in
Egypt are trying to get more Aid into
Gaza today 60 trucks have passed
yesterday another 60 the priority is for
medicine to pass we've seen children
undergoing surgeries without
anesthesia
these border crossings take time as
vehicles and documents are checked to
ensure safety that adds to people's
anxiety to get across for no one knows
how long the Raa Crossing will remain
open for those standing in Gaza it's the
only way out of
War our correspondent Rebecca ritters
joins us now from ashalon in southern
Israel Rebecca Long awaited relief at
least for some people what more can you
tell us about about efforts to evacuate
people through the rougher
Crossing well Nicole as you've been
reporting today was the first day that
the Border has actually been open and
people have been able to cross we
started getting word about this maybe
last night that things might be moving
along this morning uh we saw a list of
up to between four and 500 people
foreign Nationals largely and and some
Palestinians who work for foreign or for
an NGO
organizations uh now we have seen that
come to fruition a few less than we a
few fewer than we thought with we we're
seeing more than 320 uh people foreign
Nationals and NGO workers have managed
to cross over as well as just a little
over 80 of severely injured and sick
people as well to uh receive some
medical help in Egypt so there been a
huge sigh of relief obviously and
hopefully it is thought that this will
Kickstart uh more people being able to
cross we believe there's about 7,000
people on these uh Jewel National lists
and also other Palestinians working for
foreign NOS or NGO workers um who have
been put on these lists now we know that
the US uh the UK Germany for example
they weren't on the list today so we
should be seeing more come we did hear
today that German Nationals were told
also to start heading towards rafic
Crossing and we know that tomorrow it's
thought that the The Crossing will be
over um open again sorry and uh more
people will be through so it's a huge
sigh of relief but of course many people
still trapped inside with continual
bombardment yeah US President Joe Biden
has also announced that um US citizens
will be able to leave Gaza soon now what
do we know about the fighting in Gaza
the Israeli military says more soldiers
have been killed
there yeah just in the last little while
actually the number of dead soldiers
that the IDF has announced has risen to
16 soldiers um you this is coming out
slowly the families need to be notified
uh before they can make an official
announcement we're seeing also some
videos some obviously unverified videos
on Hamas channels that that looks like
it could in fact be a greater number but
we won't know that of course until the
coming days when official numbers do
come out but obviously it just indicates
how difficult this ground invasion is
for uh the soldiers on the ground we're
talking about tight spaces they
expanding this ground Invasion and
they're coming up they're meeting uh
some substantial resistance even though
the the the Israeli military saying that
they have now broken the Hamas line that
they are making successes but they are
paying a great a great cost though
Benjamin Netanyahu the Prime Minister
saying that they would be continuing
would they would be expanding that this
will be a long uh a long war and it will
be a difficult one for Israelis but one
that is worth fighting D correspondent
Rebecca Ritter is always great speaking
to you thank you so
much and I'm now joined by Daniel G he's
a Middle East analyst and Editor in
Chief of tenit magazine which focuses on
the Arab and Muslim world he joins us
tonight from Alexandria in Egypt welcome
back to DW now Daniel Egypt has opened
its border for foreign passport holders
and some critically injured Palestinians
for the very first time what can you
tell us about the agreement and how it
came about
well it seems that was quite a
nerve-wracking negotiation because of
course uh the people that are involved
in the Egyptian side here are the
security officials the intelligence
officials the ones that are really
caring like have a very military and
very security oriented uh look on the
situation on the other side you have the
qataris who are talking to Hamas and
hamas's allies trying to uh negotiate
the liberation of Civilian hostages at
the same time and then you have the
Americans who play a very important uh
role in the in like behind the behind
the screens because the because Anthony
blinkin is talking to the qataris to the
Egyptians and uh to the Israelis at the
same time so I think these are really
moments for classic diplomacy and not
for uh great announcement and words in
public because whatever you say what you
might you know uh marginalize or anger
one of the sides involved and all the
goodwi of all sides is very important
here so I can imagine that these
negotiations were tough and they're not
really clear when we talk about the
number of people that are allowed into
Egypt for treatment um it's not really
clear if it's about the qataris were
pushing for 500 per day um then it
wasn't sure like when would they have to
return to Gaza so all all of this is not
really uh agreed upon as far as I know
at least it is not public and I don't
have the sources on that yeah many
unknown still at this point but Qatar
that seems for sure has been
instrumental in bringing this evacuation
about what leverage does DOA have over
Hamas well Qatar has a lot of Leverage
leverage over Hamas because uh Hamas
depends on the Qatari mediation efforts
uh let's not forget that the political
leadership of Hamas which is not the
same as the military on the ground I
think there is a big a big gap between
between the political leadership and
which is also exiled and based in Doha
and the people on the ground in Gaza but
but but of course Qatar is leverage on
them because they could simply kick them
out and uh and hand hand them over to
whoever they wanted so that is leverage
that that the qataris have on the other
side let's make no mistake the the
qataris are a small negotiation team and
uh as far as I know they're really
working day at night but they need also
um something to give to the other side
from the Israelis and that has been a
big issue because of course Benjamin
nany is under intense pressure and he
wants this military campaign to go full
into uh into the Gaza Strip and uh
civili
casualties are not or or avoiding
civilian casualties seems not to be the
first priority um they're taking the
risk and of course the Americans are
really depending on the qataris at the
same time so it's a very interesting
like let's say network of actors here
and of course the Europeans can play a
role but I don't think the Europeans or
the Germans are playing the key role
here now Qatar has supported Hamas
politically you mentioned it there and
financially over many years they have
blamed Israel barely for the October 7th
Massacre so how come Israel is accepting
them as a
mediator look um Israel and Qatar have a
long-standing intelligence uh I wouldn't
say cooperation but communication all
the money that the qataris have provided
for humanitarian Aid also for the let's
say uh maintenance of the administration
in uh in Gaza uh was transferred of
course in coordination and agreement
with the Israelis that's what the
qataris have always said and Israel has
never denied it it's also quite
interesting that we hear a lot of uh
criticism against Qatar in Germany uh in
other European countries I have frankly
not heard that from the Israeli side the
mosad director um David B went to uh
Doha according to the sources that I've
talked to uh last Sunday I believe to
discuss the uh hostages situation and
the Israelis are really really depending
on the qataris because they are at the
moment the only ones who could probably
uh talk to Hamas and and and and Liber
and and negotiate at least the
liberation of the civilians so the
Israelis know what they have there and
it's quite an quite paradoxal situation
of course that they strongly disagree on
political issues but they in a way bound
to cooperate and I don't think the
qataris are doing this to do a favor to
the Israelis they're doing this because
they want to establish themselves as a
mediation power and foremost because
they uh would like to do the Americans a
favor and support the Americans they
know that the Americans would also
support them those Middle East analyst
Daniel G in Alexandria thank you for
that thank
you let's bring in on shora she's a
foreign affairs columnist at foreign
policy magazine and joins us now from
Tel Aviv welcome to the day first of all
anshal people have been let out of Gaza
for the very first time since October
7th US President Joe Biden says American
citizens will leave Gaza today is this a
oneoff or are we looking at some true
relief for the civilians in
Gaza well it's limited relief and it's
unclear whether it's a one-off or not
from what we've picked up so far that it
there will be limited openings for
limited time periods which means that
this may happen again but the number of
people to benefit will remain rather
small if you look at the overall
population of Gaza that is stuck uh uh
you know as Israel continues its
operation there so it is a relief
certainly but how many times will the
Border open for how long and how many
people would be able to get out is
unclear and it's expected thus far to
remain a small a small Affair now Qatar
has been positioning itself as a key
player in the negotiations between Egypt
between Hamas and Israel how key have
they been in securing this development
specifically well this development not
so Keen I would say I think there are
three strs to the negotiations that are
going on or in future are expected to
happen one is and most important is for
uh the people of Gaza to get uh basic
Aid that is happening between Israel and
Egypt and Hamas uh because Egypt is the
only country that Gaza has a a border
crossing uh an opening with uh the other
is Hostages this is perhaps from Israeli
perspective the most crucial that's the
one that Qatar is leading so in this
specific one I don't think katri have
played any role uh uh if if you'd ask me
and the third is the long-term talks and
uh or or a ceasefire an talk of an
enduring ceasefire there perhaps Qatar
could play a role it certainly wants to
but even there we'd see Egypt is is is
is a
competitor I want to keep looking at the
role of qar here though because it is a
very interesting player it is extremely
close to Hamas it's giving uh their
their political uh Branch um a basis
they're they're funding them in part
they have in fact exclusively blamed
Israel for the massacres on October 7th
so to what extent is Israel really
willing to work with them
here well just to clarify Qatar is
playing a very very important role and
has huge huge amounts of Leverage over
Hamas now whether it is is exercising
that leverage or not we are not very
clear because thus far only four
hostages have been released there are at
least
240 uh uh hostages the last number that
we're aware of so Qatar has huge
influence over Hamas Israelis have asked
Qatar to use it uh uh is it using it
you've got hamas's office there which
means hamas's leadership is there in
Doha in that office in Doha they're not
just sitting and having Cups of Tea but
they're actually meeting with their
Iranian and patrons they're meeting with
all sorts of their allies they're
planning things Qatar could use its
influence it is hosting the hamas's
office it sends millions in AIDS in Aid
to uh Gaza every year this money goes
through Israel and Israel knows where it
is going but it is going to Gaza to
support uh the people of Gaza but the
Israelis have long suspected and others
have said that a part of this money goes
to Hamas or at least sustains hamas's
government uh or governance uh uh its
bureaucracy there so Qatar has huge
influence thus far it says it is trying
to get the hostages released but only
four hostages have been released it is
kind of right now I think from what I've
gathered playing the role of you know
it's passing messages it's saying uh uh
Israel needs to stop bombing Gaza so
Hamas can gather all the hostages and
then send at least the civilians uh back
to Israel and because Israel isn't
stopping the bombing uh the transfer of
the hostages are not being released so
that's um I think all it's really doing
is sort of conveying what Hamas wants to
Israel and what Israel wants to Hamas
but it perhaps can play a bigger role do
you think a release of all civilians
that Hamas is currently holding is in
the
cards it is from what I've picked up
I've been talking to an official who's
aware of negotiations uh ongoing
negotiations and uh uh yes civilians
could be released uh by Hamas if Israel
stops or agrees to a ceasefire which uh
has not happened thus far although
there's talk that there might be pauses
humanitarian pauses remains to be seen
uh but the message that we're getting
from Doha uh is that uh Hamas has agreed
uh to at least return civilian hostages
but not armed uh uh um Israelis and in
exchange for armed Israelis it wants its
own Palestinian prisoners
uh uh all of them
released so just just to be clear you're
saying that Qatar is a major player
Egypt as well at Qatar wants to come out
on top of course what's in it for them
though well they want to be uh big
players in global geopolitics this is
one of the richest countries in the
world with one of the highest per capita
incomes and third largest gas reserves
they've held the they've hosted the uh
soccer uh um world cup and other
sporting tournaments and you know they
they were in Limelight again when uh
Europe cut off Russian uh gas supplies
after the after Russia's Ukraine
Invasion and and gatar has a lot of gas
so you know they want to play uh they
want to be prominent and they're
surrounded by very they're surrounded by
bigger much more influential much more
prominent uh neighbors and they've kind
of feel that they might be undermined
their Authority the authority of this
small Kingdom small but very the kingdom
might be under undermined and uh they
they want to secure their secure their
place and just to be clear i' would like
to clarify one thing here Egypt has a
different role to play kataris are
essentially looking at hostage
negotiations whereas Egypt from what
I've picked up plays a bigger role when
it comes to an enduring ceasefire or
when it comes to the passing of Aid so
these are two different
negotiations fascinating insights that
was Anora of the foreign policy magazine
joining us from Tel Aviv thanks for your
time